Hi everyone. Welcome to this talk.
Everyone could make it. I'm here to
introduce Matt Godbolt.
Matt Godbolt is a C++ developer who
loves looking under the hood of
compilers, operating systems, and
silicon. By day, he writes software for
finance, like many of us here. By night,
he emulates vintage computers and
maintains Compiler Explorer. Well,
Compiler Explorer is the official name,
but everybody knows it as Godbolt. So,
naturally, when someone set up the Jane
Street internal instance, they named
Godbolt, making Matt the first external
speaker who already has an internal
domain name named after him.
Please join me in welcoming Matt
Godbolt.
[Applause]
Thank you, Jasper. Well, thank you for
having me. This is fantastic. I uh
I I'm looking forward to talking to you
about the kind of things that I love
digging into. So, this is
microarchitecture watch what happens
beneath, which is not my best title. So,
yeah, as Jasper says, Compiler Explorer
is why you probably heard of me before.
I love making emulators roll computers.
That's what I've been doing for the last
year as I've been on a non-compete. My
non-compete ended today, which is why
I'm able to be here talking to you.
But, next week I'll be working at HRT.
So, we'll be neighbors. I'll be up the
street. Friendly competition.
I also love trying to reverse engineer
what the heck is going on inside your
CPU. Right, Intel famously doesn't give
a lot of information about what's going
on inside the computer. And um
that's for obvious reasons to do with,
you know, intellectual property,
whatever. But, there's a sort of small
but dedicated community of folks who are
trying to work out what actually is
going on inside. This is my contribution
to it where I was trying to work out how
the branch target buffer worked inside
some of the older chips. We're going to
be talking about some old chips today,
unfortunately, because I don't have
access to some very, very new stuff
because I've been on non-compete for a
year, and it's very expensive to rent
them. Um
But, anyway, I I've done some research
before. And my sort of claim to fame on
this is that I was cited in the Meltdown
and Spectre Spectre paper, which was a
kind of a a kind of nice moment of
recognition for this kind of stuff.
Uh you've probably seen a CPU pipeline
before in textbooks. And I know I've
been speaking to some folks who are now
sitting very threateningly in the front
row.
And they have a very deep understanding
of everything we're going to cover here.
But, for the rest of you all, hopefully
you'll forgive me doing a quick sort of
introduction reminder of what a CPU
pipeline looks like. So,
when I grew up, this is what a CPU
pipeline looked like. You fetched an
instruction, you decoded it, you
executed it, and you wrote it back in
sequence. And then, you know, you could
do this as a sort of production line, as
a pipeline, one step at a time. So, one
instruction was being fetched while the
previous one was being decoded, and the
one before that's already being
executed, and the one after that before
that is being written back. And
therefore, although it takes four cycles
to get through here, we're still doing
one useful piece of work every clock
cycle. That was a big win.
Modern
CPUs though realized that if we can do
we can do better than just this sort of
single step at a time,
we can break the system into sort of
three broad categories. We've got a
front end where we've got a branch
prediction unit.
I wanted to talk to you a lot about
branch prediction. I actually did a
whole bunch of reverse engineering work
for it, but I don't have time. So, we'll
have to talk about it afterwards or in
the pub or something like that. But,
anyway, there's a fetcher decoder as
before. We have a rename step, which is
sort of the gateway into a new world.
And then, after that, this middle
section here, this is the back end.
Things can happen out of order, which
sounds counterintuitive, but in programs
very often we write code which has lots
of little parts that aren't totally
dependent on each other. You know, you
read a value, you add 10 to it, you
store it somewhere else. You read
another value, you add 20 to it, you
store it somewhere else. It's like,
well, those two things could happen at
the same time.
And so, if you can pick up enough
instructions in one go, you can actually
do more than one piece of work per clock
cycle. And that's what this sort of
stack is here in the execute. And that's
what the out-of-order system is doing.
It's doing some clever dependency
tracking, and then everything happens in
whenever
execution units are available and
they've
results inputs are ready. And then,
finally, we come to the retirement
stage, and that's where everything gets
put back in the order that the program
was written in so that you don't notice
the monkey business that's been going on
in the middle bit.
Okay.
But, we're going to be talking
specifically about Skylake, which is
old, 2019, 2020-ish era is when it was
out. But, again, my laptop is a Skylake.
My desktop machine is a Comet Lake or
Skylake X, actually. Yeah, the laptop's
Comet Lake. So, these are representative
of the kinds of things that actually
happen in a modern CPU, but they have
changed into kind of server quality CPUs
that you'll be using in your day-to-day
job. Um where I remember them, I will
try and call out the differences. But,
again, I couldn't test the things that
were on more modern machines.
Uh so, out-of-order on Skylake is a
little bit more complicated than that
nice textbook diagram. We have a front
end that looks like this.
Again, the branch prediction unit we're
not going to be talking about. We have
sort of two parallel lines, the fetch
predecode instruction queue, and then
many decoders.
Beneath that, we've got a micro-op
cache.
To the right of that, we've got a a
queue of micro-operations, and amusingly
named LSD. Then, we hit the renamer.
We're going to talk about all of these
things in a second. I just wanted to
give you a big picture of like where
we're going with all of this. Um
There What was I going to say about
this? There was something I meant to
say. Uh it'll come to me. We'll cover it
anyway. Uh so, anyway, this is the front
end. At this point here, by the time Oh,
that's right. Micro-ops. I've written
micro-op here. So, instructions are
specifically on Intel um are broken into
smaller operations, micro-operations.
So, unlike most RISC processors where
you're just like adding two numbers
together or you're reading or you're
doing a branch, some of the Intel
instructions are crazy, and you can like
do some crazy address calculation, which
is, you know, one number plus another
one times four plus some offset, and
that's the address that you're going to
read from. Then, you read from that
address. Then, you're going to add to
it, and then you're going to store back
to it. And that's one instruction. So,
it makes sense for the poor front end
here, which deals in terms of those
crazy x86 instructions, to break it down
into a sensible RISC architecture in the
back end. But, we never get to see that.
We just have to infer its presence from
all the measurements we do on the
outside.
So, that's what a micro-op is.
Yeah, so we By the time we get to this
point here, we have a stream of
micro-operations that are in program
order. They get to the renamer, and then
they reach the back end, which is a
little bit smaller and simpler, and we
won't be covering as much of this. If
I've got my timings right, we've
probably only got 5 minutes of this at
the end. But, we've got a scheduler.
We've got multiple execution units, not
the four that are here. There are
actually many more than that. And then,
there's a write-back stage. Then, we
have the retirement, and then
post-retirement, we have the store
buffer commit phase. And again, each of
these steps is probably a
simplification, but this is mostly built
out of measurements that we can make.
And by we, I don't mean me, actually.
Although I have contributed to this in
the past, that the community of people
that
uh that reverse engineer all this kind
of stuff, I'm relying very much on their
results that I'm presenting here. These
things are not necessarily found in the
Intel manuals. You have to go and dig
them out yourself. So, I have some
references at the end. If you're
interested in this and how you can
measure it yourself,
knock yourself out. It's a really,
really interesting rabbit hole to go
down.
Um this selection of
TLAs, this soup of letters over here,
are all the sort of shared data
structures that each of the bits of the
system can see. We'll talk about those
separately, but I wanted to call them
out to begin with. We've got a physical
Excuse me.
We have physical register register
storage. So, while you tend to write
programs or C programs in assembly that
refer to, you know, EAX and ECX and EDX
and whatever, the 16 registers that we
have access to. 16, what a luxurious
number. I know we were talking about
earlier that we probably could do with
some more, but like it wasn't that long
ago we only had eight of them, of which
two of them were used for other
purposes. But, that is small fry
compared to the number of register slots
that are actually available on the CPU.
And so, that behind the scenes, it's
doing all sorts of allocation and
renaming and
and mapping to take advantage of the
extra space it has on the chip. So, the
physical register file contains all of
the actual values of the registers, and
there are probably hundreds of those.
The RAT is the register alias table, and
that's the the structure that maps the
current EAX to where on earth it is
currently on the chip.
And other things. There's a reorder
buffer, which stores essentially a
ledger of all of the micro-operations
that have flown flowed flown flowed
through the system.
And is essentially doing sort of the
reference keeping of like this is the
point at which we know an instruction
has been issued, and later on we will
retire it in the order that they came
through into this reorder buffer.
Then, there's a reservation station,
which is also called the scheduler in
some literature. That's where we
actually store the things that have yet
to be processed. Like the actual
operations themselves are like, I need
to do an add of this number and that
other number. Or this number and a
number that we'll get when we
read that it depends upon has completed.
They live in the reservation station.
Branch order buffer is a sort of
checkpointing system for branch
misprediction. Again, I wanted to talk
more about this, but sadly, we don't
have time. But, it's fascinating. If
you're sitting down and think about what
the thing must be doing when it's
predicting, you know, 20 branches in the
future, and then it gets one of them
wrong, and it doesn't want to throw all
of the work away.
And then, there's a memory order buffer,
which is responsible for making sure
that loads and stores to memory still
make sense even though we've reordered
everything. So, we're going to start
with the front end. This is going to be
the majority of the talk, and I forgot
to start my timer. So, I'm going to have
to rely on looking at the clock behind
you to see where I am.
I'm going to use this example, and I
sort of it's thematic that I have to do
it in C++. Although we did attempt to
write this in OCaml earlier.
It did not generate the same code.
I will leave that to your imagination.
So, it's a it's a bit of a it's a bit of
a made-up thing. It's taking an array of
integers, it's squaring them, and
summing them up. So, it's just doing
like a rolling sum of all of the integer
sum squares, effectively it is. And it
suits my purpose because it compiles to
six instructions and exactly 16 bytes of
machine code. So, I'm sure you're
reasonably familiar with this, but on
the right-hand side we have this text
representation, which is the assembly
code, and on the left-hand side is the
bytes that the CPU actually reads out.
That's the machine code.
It used to catch me all the time. I used
to use the two interchangeably, which is
foolish. And you know, you don't really
need to know about it. It's like we read
the array pointer, we square it, we add
it to our running total, we move the
array pointer to the next element, we
compare it to the end one, and then we
jump back if it isn't at the end. Yeah.
Pretty straightforward stuff, 16 bytes
worth. Um what you'll notice though,
immediately, is that each of these is a
different length. We've got a two-byte
instruction, a three-byte one, there's
even a four-byte one here.
In general, x86 instructions can be
anything from one byte to 15 bytes long.
And it's not sensibly written because
it's kind of the sort of thing that
happens when you take a design from the
1970s and incrementally add things to it
while we're maintaining backwards
compatibility, which means that sort of
everything has harks back to these
ancient ways, and there's like bytes
that say, "Hey, the the next byte is now
interpreted differently unless it's
Tuesday and the moon is rising, and then
which case So, it's really quite
complicated to disassemble x86. Anyone
who uses ARM or or MIPS or RISC-V or
whatever, it's lovely. They're all the
instructions are the same length, so
it's very simple. But that's kind of why
we need to do this complicated decode.
Another thing I'm going to quickly show
you is an instruction trace of a sort.
Um this comes through a somewhat heavily
modified um tool called uica, which is
the microcode analyzer that Andreas
Able, um who's now at Google, has
written and open-sourced. And this sort
of lets us see the the an individual
instructions journey through the
pipeline. So, what we're seeing is one
instruction and then all the stages it
goes through from left to right from
time base. So, this this instruction
takes 16 cycles. On the first cycle
here, it's being pre-decoded. It's
hitting the the instruction queue here.
It's being issued, dispatched, executed,
and then retired in this particular just
want to show an example. We'll have a
few more of these up. I'll explain them
a bit more as we hit them, but I don't
want it to be surprising when I when it
popped up.
All right, first stage, fetching. This
is probably the easiest stage, although
I'm going to gloss over a whole bunch of
really complicated stuff that it does.
So, we have the predicted instruction
pointer. So, the fetch unit doesn't wait
for the program to definitely go
somewhere. It's being told where to go
by the branch predictor at all times.
And so, that's kind of a really
interesting uh aspect that I had never
even considered because you might pick
up a bunch of 16 bytes. And until you've
decoded it, which is like four or five
steps down, you don't even know if
there's a branch in there. And by that
time, you've already had two more
16-byte chunks of memory that you've
pulled up, and you're like, "Well, I
went the wrong way, right?" So, and
that's not a That's a That's a be an
unconditional branch, right? If it's
conditional, you have to actually even
execute to work out whether or not
you're going to take it or not. So, the
branch predictor's got a great job. And
it does by and large a good job. Um so,
we we the fetch unit picks up 16 bytes
at a time at a 16-byte um
uh boundary, which means that if you
branch through the middle of a 16-byte
boundary, then you're immediately
wasting a bit of bandwidth there because
you're missing out on some of the bytes
that you could have picked up in one
cycle. The other thing to note here is
that I'm not going to talk about caches
at all because that's another two hours
talk. Um but this obviously has to
liaise with the TLB to go and work out
where the heck these instructions
actually come from and the L1, L2, L3
caches to actually fetch the bytes into
64-byte cache line to then pull 16 bytes
of it down. So, there's a lot of work
hiding here.
But the result of this fetch stage is
some kind of pipeline of chunks of 16
bytes, presumably with some kind of
address that's tagged with them, so we
knew where they came from. And it can be
checked later on. All right, easy one
done.
Because the x86 instruction set is so
complicated, and because what we want to
do is is unlock this parallelism where
we can run more than one instruction at
a time, if the most that we could do in
a single instruction, sorry, in a single
clock cycle was decode one instruction,
then we'd be missing a trick down the
line. And so, what we want to try and do
is decode as many instructions as we
possibly can out of this block block of
16 bytes in one
clock cycle.
So, it's broken down into stages. The
first stage here is a called a
pre-decode stage. And the pre-decoders
have a set of kind of flaky heuristics
about what these bytes might mean.
They're flaky because the only thing
that we can think of, again, we being in
this instance um
uh
Agner Fog, is that the only way it can
be decoding this because we have no idea
where the instructions lie in here. All
we know is they don't overlap with each
other, and they depend, of course, on
having decoded the previous instruction.
And so, how could you possibly do it in
one cycle?
The only thing we think of is that it's
it just speculatively tries to decode an
instruction at every possible offset,
and then it has a sort of filter a step
where it says, "Well, these ones overlap
with the one that's come before, so it
can't that can't be a valid decode." And
again, it's a bit of a heuristic hack.
It never gets it wrong, per se, but it
sometimes conservatively tags
instructions for the a later stage of
the pipeline that are tagged as being
more complicated than they actually are.
So, we'll get to that in a sec. So,
these 16 bytes happen to represent
exactly my routine that we were that I
showed. The pre-decoder tags it into It
essentially just breaks it down and
says, "Well, there's there's This is the
opcode byte. These are the opcode bytes,
whatever." Again, a lot of this now,
when I'm pointing at this side here, is
my kind of guestimate about what's going
on. It's not canonical. There's no
source for exactly what's flowing here,
but hopefully you'll forgive me. And the
interesting thing here is that what
we've done is we've been able to
discover where the bytes of the first
instruction, which is that mole, the
second one, which is the imul, the add
edx, the add rdi here, and then for this
last one, this is a compare and a jump.
And at this stage in the pipeline, it
spots an opportunity because although we
treat them as two separate instructions,
we have to. Well, that's what the ISA
is. It's so common, you know, every
branch every loop ends in a compare and
jump if not equal or something like
that. The Intel have decided to say,
"Well, what if we had an instruction
which was just a compare and jump as one
unit?" Well, we could make a new
instruction, we could issue it, and then
write all the compiler writers, you
know, actually emit this instruction, or
we could just spot it in the instruction
stream and replace it here. And that's
what they do. This is called
macro-instruction fusion, and it's
tagged, at least, in this pre-decode
step. So, we still don't know really
what these bytes are. And again,
sometimes the bit masks or whatever it
does are wrong.
I'm going to run out of time if I keep
doing this.
Um okay, from the Yeah, so the
limitations of the pre-decoder, it can
do up to five instructions in a cycle,
and it does this macro-op fusion. Now,
at the moment, and by the moment I mean
for Skylake, it may have changed, but I
don't think that this one has. Um a
compare and test on anything that isn't
memory, which is therefore more
complicated, followed by any branch,
that's treated as a single operation. An
add, subtract, increment, decrement, or
an and followed by a branch on these
limited set of of instructions is
treated again as a single unit as a
compare and branch. Um it's worth saying
that you probably don't do this,
although you write compilers, so you
might have the latitude to do this. Um
don't put any length-changing prefixes.
These are usually used in like the crazy
32-bit modes um to to use smaller
pointers, but they effectively snarl up
the pre-decoder. It just goes, "Whoops,
I don't know." Because you can make an
arbitrarily complicated instruction out
of just putting random-ass prefixes in
it. Um and it just gives its hands up,
and it takes I think it's three cycle
penalty if if it sees one. It's like,
"Whoop, I'm out." And yes, the other
thing that it does do is it notices
whether or not a an instruction is
simple or complex. And so, it steers
that instruction to the appropriate
decoder. Uh steering's not really the
right word, but
um I'll see I should I tell you what I
mean here. So,
these sort of partially decoded
instructions, which again are just
blocks of bytes and presumably some kind
of sequence. You keep these I say keep
putting yourself and seek here. I don't
think it uses addresses internally to
track because obviously, if you've got a
loop, you'll see the same address over
and over again. It must be some kind of
global sequence number that's used for
like, "Hey, this branch was
mispredicted. Everything after this is
now
garbage." So, I'm just going to say and
sequence number.
So, we've got partially just decoded
instructions, and uh they're passed on
to the decoder. The decoder, there are
four units, and they are passed them in
order.
Um
the result of which is, and again, this
is me making up my own syntax over here,
the micro-operations.
In this particular example, every
instruction is one micro-operation. So,
each one in on that side is one thing on
this side here. So, one of them is like
a 32-bit load through rdi, a multiply,
an add, an add, whatever. And then this
one is a macro-fused one, in which I've
made up an instruction of compare and
jump.
Um variously, these kinds of things.
Okay. Um
There are two kinds of uh fusion. One is
the macro-fusion we've already talked
about. So, macro-fusion, macro is big.
This is how I remember them. That means
that two big things, the instructions,
have been fused into one internal
operation. So, we've talked about that.
Micro-fusion, on the other hand, is
well, this stupid syntax, or sorry, this
stupid ISA that Intel have come up with,
it's so so common to have an address
operand on the right-hand side. While
this is logically two operations, that
is, an add rax, comma r14 is go
calculate whatever r14 is, go read that
from the cache, and then come back, and
then go to the ALU and add it to rax,
right? That's two distinct operations.
Practically, for most of the time, we
What if we just made our micro-op like
format a little bit wider and had like
an optional memory tag, and then we
could like put for most instructions
that we've got space, we can say, "Well,
this is both a an add and a read." And
for the simpler cases, that can happen.
And so, a micro-fused micro-fused
instruction will later on be actually
executed by two different parts of the
chip as two micro-operations, but at
this point, we can pack it into one
micro-op in all the queues and things
that are coming up down.
Um
so, we've got micro-fusion,
macro-fusion. There is also a microcode
sequencer.
Uh the microcode sequencer is
effectively a ROM with a sort of simple
interpreter put on top of it. And so,
anything that's more complicated than
four micro-operations needs to come from
a ROM rather than just being sort of
hardwired in the code. And that ROM can
either just literally puke out a bunch
of micro-ops. Here's 15 micro-ops for a
complicated instruction. Or it can
actually have logic in it itself. It can
actually go like, "Oh, okay. Well, while
ECX is not equal to zero, keep issuing
these micro-ops, right?"
And so, for things that are complicated
like locked operations, which I'm sure
anyone who's done threading has seen,
that takes more more operations than
four. Or obviously things like rep
stores, which is a repeating operation.
This is effectively just a microcode
sequence of just keep emitting the read
and write operation until you hit the
end of the thing that you're copying.
And obviously complicated things like
read MSR or cupid. They you know
effectively runs a little program. You
know, it's going to go off and say,
"Hey, what kind of CPU are you?" Well, I
can return that. So, that's kind of
cool. I actually met somebody who worked
at Intel. He said, "Oh, yeah, my
neighbor writes microcode." I'm like,
"What a crazy job that must be to sit
there and just write write this stuff
that's
right on the other end of this.
And then the other thing that's sort of
done by the microcode sequencer are
things like divides. I know they're also
complicated, you know, more than four or
five micro-operations, but it was kind
of an
opener to me. I was like, "Oh, that's
how divides work." You know, it's got
all this acceleration circuitry, but
that's how they can short circuit. It's
like, "Well, okay, we've reached the
point where there's no more bits coming
out. We can stop here."
Anyway, I've got a thing about divides.
You'll learn that in a second.
So, we've got four decoders, but not all
decoders are created equal. The first
decoder is the the real decoder. It can
do up to four micro-ops. So, any
instruction that is four micro-ops or
less can go and be passed by the first
decoder.
Anything that's also that's tagged as
complex, even if it actually turns out
to be a simple operation, gets put to
the the first decoder and the other ones
won't touch it.
Any instruction that requires a switch
to the microcode sequencer has to go
through the first decoder as well. So,
things like that I divide, the first
step will be, "Hey, here's the setup
code." And then now we're going to start
reading from the microcode sequencer.
Decoders two, three, four can only do a
single micro-operation. So, only simple
things. But this is actually the fused
micro-op. So, those adds with memory,
that still counts as one in this world,
even though later on it's going to be
um broken into two.
We good so far? I've seen a lot of nods
from the front row, which I appreciate
very much.
So, you can decode four instructions or
five micro-ops, which means that like if
you really need to get lots of
micro-operations out, you can have a
four micro-operation instruction
followed by a one micro-operation
instruction, and that can come out in
one clock cycle. And then the other two
decoders just have to sit and twiddle
their thumbs. 311, 2111, or 1111. Right?
And luckily, most things fit into this
world, unless you're doing something
silly like dividing again.
The worst case you can possibly do is
just have a sequence of instructions
which are exactly two micro-ops each
because they only go to the first one
and all the other ones are are idle. And
then the next clock cycle you generate
two. So, that's the worst case.
Um but although I've just banged on
about this and it sounds interesting and
complicated, and Intel refer to this as
the legacy decode pipeline, not that we
have any other choices. Thanks, Intel.
Um we're mostly saved by the next thing
we're going to talk about, which is the
micro-op cache and the loop stream
detector.
Um I had a sketch of what might be in a
micro-op. I've been sort of trying to
in my mind construct a my own emulator
stroke simulator so that I kind of
exercise the parts of like what where
things would need to go, but I don't
need to talk about it cuz I'm going to
have time.
Uh just to show you some pretty rainbow
diagrams. These are some other more
complicated instructions that come out
as being two micro-ops three and four.
Although most of these are fused in the
fused domain still. I think this is only
two and this is only one. I think this
is the only one that's actually three
micro-ops. But you can kind of see a
push RAX is like, "Well, I have to write
RAX to the stack pointer and then I have
to update the stack pointer." Makes
sense?
Exchange RBX RAX is probably temp equals
RBX RA, you know, the whole switch
thing. It doesn't do XORs, I'm pretty
sure.
Maybe it does. I mean, who knows? And
then an add pointer here is one of those
really complicated memory operations
where we have to read the memory, we
have to then add to it, and then we have
to write it back. And writing back is
always two ops because the the address
generation is separate from the data
part of the store for reasons we'll
touch later.
All right.
And then yeah, because I have to put a
divide on here.
This is a 32-bit divide on Skylake.
They've got a lot better. I mean, I'm
sure Granite Rapids is a lot quicker
than this, but this I know, when I first
time I sketched this I
got it to print this out, I was like,
"Oh my god." Yeah, it's like 100 cycles
for the for the 64-bit version. But what
the interesting points are here is like
so we can see that like in the first
clock cycle, the decoder zero was able
to output these three micro-ops. They
kind of flow through. And then you it
switches to the microcode sequencer and
there's a two-cycle delay here. And now
it kind of carries on doing all of its
whatever magical stuff is going on here.
A note about these, these are very
empirically derived from like looking at
port pressure. So, we're not 100% sure
what the individual operations are
doing. And sometimes these, you know,
when things finish, I'm not totally sure
it's right.
So, yes, we're saved by the micro-op
cache.
Uh the micro-op cache sort of sits
logically to the side of this whole
complicated pipeline we've just been
talking about. And we're in one of two
modes. Either we're caching or we're
reading from the cache.
So, unlike like the the regular sort of
like L1, L2, L3 caches, it's not like
every read goes and says, "Are you
there?" Okay, no, I better go and do it
the hard way. It's just you're in one
mode or the other mode. And there's
jumps that determine whether or not that
process starts.
Uh so, yes, in caching mode, as we're
running through our program, the
micro-ops that the
translation engine has been doing,
sorry, MITE is the microinstruction
translation engine. As again, Intel
loves coming up with complicated names
for things. It's the or the legacy
pipeline.
They get pushed into this cache and then
they're just sort of written into the
cache. Or if a jump happens and the part
of the branch prediction or whatever
part notices that the destination that
jump happens to be in the micro-op
cache, then we start streaming instead
from the micro-op cache.
And this is the happy place. You want to
be in this situation. So, the result of
that is just a also micro-operations.
Uh the micro-operation cache is the
weirdest cache you've ever seen because
it has a really difficult job.
Um if you think about a normal cache,
like an L1, L2, whatever, you've got a
one-to-one mapping. It's like, "This
byte is in that cache line." And then
you just fetch the whole cache line
around it and you whack it in the cache
and you're done. But if we jump to an
address that's not on a like a cache
line boundary, then will we decode that
instruction, but we don't we can't
reverse back and say, "Well, what was
the instruction before it then?" You
just have to kind of start at that
point. And so, there's a lot of really
weird restrictions on it.
This has changed a lot since Skylake,
but the Skylake has 32 sets by eight
ways. And each way cache line has up to
six micro-operations in it. Some of the
micro-ops take two slots. So, like if
you've got one of the MOV with a 64-bit
value,
you need to have two slots in order to
sort of store the 64-bit value. It is
inclusive with the L1I, which is a clue
into how it's implemented. And then the
weird thing here is that there are no
more than three ways can be used by any
32-byte of of code.
And this to me smells like they had hit
a real snag because morally this is very
similar to the trace cache that the
Pentium Pro used. And I don't know
you're all a little too young.
[Laughter]
But the problem with that was that you
have as many entries in the cache as
there are traces through your code.
And so, very quickly you blow up as the
the traces change. Um so, I think they
try and limit that by saying if any
block of memory, small small area of the
of the program, needs more than three
lines, then we're probably in this case
where it's about to start monopolizing
the whole cache. Like we'd rather throw
it away and prevent it from being um
cached at all.
Um
it's worth saying that yeah, the any
branch, even a not taken branch, ends a
cache line and then it starts caching
from the next thing. So, it kind of
tries to find the the sensible
boundaries.
But um the one of the sort of like take
homes from this is if you're generating
code, if you have more than one entry
point into the same 32-byte block, then
you might be not using the DSB as
effectively as you like. And I know that
it's quite typical in compilers to like
start with a, "Hey, let's do some setup
code." Then we jump to the end of the
loop that then does the like the loop
end and then it jumps to just below the
setup code to like then run around. And
you're like, "Ah, now I've got two
entries."
But so, you can have to think about it.
Two is probably fine.
Um
and
yeah, I forgot to say this before, but
like you know, we this is why we align
loops on 16-byte boundaries typically so
that you get the benefit of the fetch
system picking up the loop.
Uh okay. But yes, in newer machines, it
is more like
um
you can have six ways in 64 bytes. So,
it's a bit of a weirder thing more
closely tied to the L1 cache.
All right. I think yes. And then you can
deliver anywhere between four and six
micro-ops per cycle, which means that
even if they're complicated or simple or
whatever instructions, you can get a
pretty consistent stream out of it. The
literature says six. I could only ever
measure four. Um so, I don't know if
whatever.
All right. Yes. Uh yes, the loop stream
detector. The loop stream detector
So, in between this sort of source of
micro-operations that's coming from
either the legacy system or the cache,
there is a queue. Obviously, you know,
we love queues. Queues buffer if the
renamer or the the execution unit is
sort of backing up a little bit, we've
got a bit of space in here. But this
this queue effectively is a big circular
buffer of a couple of hundred entries
that we're writing our microcodes in
program order in.
And what the loop stream detector does
underneath is it says, "Wait a second.
You've jumped to a location that's
actually already in this buffer." You
know, it may have already popped off the
end of it, but like, you know, we
haven't overwritten it yet. Wait a
second. Wouldn't it be better if we just
kind of held that part and just kept
streaming back that same sequence of
events over and over and over again?
And so, that's what the loop stream
detector does. And that means it can
turn down the whole front end. Then
there's no caching that has to be done.
There's no decoding. It's just
brilliant. But it's relatively small.
And it has limitations. So, it spots
loops that fit in the queue entirely. It
can deliver each cycle up to four
micro-operations. And but it it can't
deliver more than one loop iteration.
So, if you have a really small loop or a
loop that doesn't fit into a multiple of
four, then you might get like uh you
know, if it was five, you get four in
the first cycle and one in the next one
and then four and then one and four and
one. Except, it can unroll. It actually
spots the longest thing it can fit get
up to eight times in the Skylake. Um so,
that you it'll actually unroll that loop
effectively in hardware and go, "Well, I
now if I take my five iterations and I
and I do them four times." My math is
not good. Uh five fours are 20. 20 / 4
Yes, I think we're good, right? Yeah.
Something like that.
Um so, then it would just fit and then
in every cycle it can stamp out four,
which is pretty cool.
Which is great. But why was it in
parentheses and why did it have a star?
Well,
it's disabled on Skylake.
Which was reported by the due to a
massive thing and this is where I'm
actually going to bring up my notes.
Sorry. You're going to have to see
speaker view for a second because Yes,
here we go. It was described as a
nightmare level bug in the Debian fix.
Short loops using the AHBH you know, the
high part of the 16-bit register and the
corresponding wide res may result in
unpredictable system behavior.
I mean,
whoa.
That is scary stuff. So,
props to them. I don't know what it was
and I'm There are people in this
audience who probably can tell.
But something about the OCaml runtime or
the OCaml compiler liked to do this.
Like in a loop it would use the high
eight bits and the low eight bits. Maybe
tagging. I'm looking over at you two
because you're my favorite two to look
at. But
yeah, it was found by some folks in the
OCaml community and reported and then it
was Intel determined it couldn't be
fixed and they just issued a microcode
patch which turned the whole thing off.
Wow.
Okay.
Yes. Yes, OCaml.
We did weird things so you didn't have
to, right? Okay. A renaming. So, now we
get to the cool part here. Now, again,
those of you who have done like college
level stuff stuff courses in in in this
kind of
out of order execution, this is probably
meat and drink, but I'm going to go over
anyway cuz it's just really interesting
and the penny dropped for me writing
these slides about how important this
whole process is. So,
the renamer has probably the biggest job
in the entirety of the front end because
it has about three different jobs. The
first thing that happens is that now the
micro-ops have reached this point. This
is like the first point where we can
say, "This is definitely going to
happen. So, we're going to put it into I
mean, definitely. It's definitely
speculatively going to happen. It might
be undone later on when we discover we
shouldn't have done it this way, but
like we're going to write it into the
the reorder buffer which just says this
instruction happened or will happen."
We also re- then rename the to physical
registers. So, we take the EXs and the
RDIs and whatever and we use this vast
array of on-chip resources to actually
use for registers. So, again, I'll talk
about that in a sec. And then it also
takes the micro-operations that were
represented and shifts them off to the
right execution units to sit to wait.
So, they'll sit in those schedulers
until either the uh the execution unit
is ready to accept a new uh operation.
Maybe you know, there's a multiplier
that's backed up waiting and there are
other queues
other instructions ahead of it or um
maybe this instruction depends on the
result of an
a previous instruction that hasn't
completed yet. And so, it'll sit there
and wait until all of its dependencies
come in. But this is the point at which
we kind of like fan out into all the
various data structures and then the out
of order system picks it up on the other
side.
Amazingly, although it's doing all this
complicated work, it can do four
micro-ops a cycle. I This is staggering.
Maybe this is the kind of thing that in
hardware is a lot easier than it sounds,
right? This is the kind of thing you
discover.
So, the first thing we do is the reorder
buffer write. This is just to have our
ledger for in order completion later on.
There is a process called unlamination
that happens at this point. So, at this
point sometimes the micro-op that came
through, even though it wasn't micro-op
fused, is determined to be this is
actually more complicated than I can do
in a single unit. And so, it'll break it
up at that point into multiple pieces.
Um some of the more complicated
addressing modes sometimes fall into
this category. For operations that could
otherwise go to like the adder. It's
like, "Well, the adder can't do this."
I'm a little vague on that. I'll be
honest with you. Um but unlamination is
uh is a thing that can generate extra
micro-ops at this point.
Um
There are 224 entries in the reorder
buffer. That is the sort of top end of
how many things that can be possibly in
flight at once
um that are in the system being
executed. That's more like 500 on um I'm
looking at you two in the front again
for this. I think it's about 500 in um
Granite Rapids and and above. So, that's
that's what a place that they have
changed a lot and expanded.
It kind of looks something like this.
You know, we have some kind of sequence
number for each of the instructions in
sequence. We know The information it
needs to track is where are we writing
to and then what rename happened. Um
we'll get to why we needed that
information. It's sort of weird that we
need both the source and the old
version. Partly for undo, you know, if
we were to talk about branch stuff. But
partly for another thing that I'd never
considered before.
Um and then we've got some kind of type
of information and this has to do with
like where if it's a branch, where where
it's sort of restore state might be
stored. And then the the important thing
over here is that while this is all
written to in this re- rob write, this
part over here, the execution and
exception is going to be written to once
the instruction has actually finished.
So, it's going to go through the rest of
the pipeline and come back here. And so,
in my sort of example I've got up here,
this first instruction, this load, has
completed, which means it's gone through
the the system. It's finished.
Um it's done with and it could be
retired at any point. We could the
retirement unit could finish it off. Um
and you can see I can't remember what I
did. Oh yeah, it's got a source down
here with P22. Yeah. There's sort of an
an implied dependency and that's not
really that important. And again, we
don't really know what this looks like.
This is the minimum set of information I
think it needs.
The issuing step um is where we actually
take the live to be calculated micro-op
and give it off to these execution
units. There are the execution units are
in two big blocks that have many ports
on them. It's a weird terminology. But
there's an an ALU unit that has all of
the things to do with, you know,
arithmetic and logic as you might
imagine. And then there's a sort of
memory system which only does loads and
address generation. And they have
different numbers of entries. They're
all presumably balanced by some kind of
internal um
pressure inside both the layout and the
complexity of those things. And also,
you know, the the experiments that Intel
do in terms of how many of each type of
instruction they typically have live at
once.
Um The issuing determines also which
port within each of these. So, these are
further subdivided. But at this point,
this is when it's decided where it's
going to ultimately go. So, even if it's
an add and there are like three
different locations on the chip where
that add could happen, we decide now at
rename time which of the adders it's
going to go to. Which is a little bit
myopic cuz you know, by the time it
actually gets ready to run, maybe that's
not the best choice of adder now. Maybe
there's some free adders somewhere else.
But it's useful to know. And obviously,
it's a simplifying assumption here. Um
the algorithm has been
reverse-engineered with high probability
that they got it right. And it's kind of
a simple as you might imagine. It's to
do with like the balance of how many
operations have gone recently. And it
picks tends to pick the higher port
numbers if um if they're more free if
there's a tie. And then it's sort of the
of the four instructions um issued, the
one and three go to the top place best
place to to schedule them and two and
four go to the second place. So, it kind
of tries to balance them as well. It's
again, it's documented. You can go read
the Python code that does the same
thing.
And at this point also now um separate
from unlamination which actually makes
two entries in the reorder buffer for an
instruction that we notice later on is a
bit more complicated. Anything that's
actually micro-fused,
that is like the add with the RDI, gets
separated into the load component that's
going to go over here into the load unit
and the add part that's going to depend
on the load that's going to go into the
ALU component.
So, um the difference between
unlamination micro-ops and micro-fusion
is that this only has one sort of slot
in the output buffer in the reorder
buffer, whereas the unlamination stuff
actually takes up more resources in
there. Not that that's a huge problem
with 224 of them.
All right. Good. Good. Good. Good. Uh
so, to again, I think really the reason
for me putting this up here is to sort
of show you what information is being
stored in each part because for the
longest time I had reservation station
um
which is the scheduler, sorry, and the
the thing that the issue is writing to
and reorder buffer kind of mixed up in
my mind. So, this is more of my symptom
of me explaining to myself so that I
could talk to you about it, but
hopefully you'll forgive me. So, it
looks something like this. We have a
bunch of um
of of operations micro-operations. These
are no longer in any particular order.
And we have, you know, maybe three
sources that can happen and we've got a
destination that it's going to write to
and it's an add. And um this is a guess.
Now,
I've been unable to find anything that
tells me whether or not the values of
known quantities are stored in
the
um the the the scheduler in in this sort
of micro-operation or it's just a
reference.
Now, the way that I've chosen to show
this is that this one has two resolved
sources. So, these have already
completed the instructions that
generated these two numbers. Maybe this
was actually in the op code and this one
was like reading from a register. These
two have already completed. So, I've
written the values in here. And then
with for these guys here, I've shown
that like I'm waiting for the previous
instruction that's
this guy in fact. He's going to write to
P24.
I'm going to wait for him. And then when
he's completed, he'll tell me what the
results are and I'll I'll put it in
here. We don't know if that actually
happens as in this broadcast action
causes the issues things to get written
as these slots to get written to.
Um There's some circumstantial evidence
that maybe it is because there's a
broadcast bus.
But it also opens more questions about
what happens if you are issuing
instructions that have two known
quantities and then we have to read an
arbitrary number of like physical
registers in one clock cycle. Like if
every instruction had three sources,
each of which wasn't already in flight,
then you could imagine that issuing four
of them means that we have to read from
the register port four times three times
and that doesn't seem realistic either.
So, and no one has been able to find a
limit to how many you can read, unlike
Sandy Bridge which had a very very
limited number of read ports. So,
something magic is happening, we don't
know what.
Anyhow,
um let's talk about renaming. Um so,
let's talk about first of all the nuts
and bolts of renaming. So, what renaming
is going to do is going to unlock more
out of order opportunities down in the
rest of the pipeline.
And what we're going to do is we're
going to break any dependency that we
can because many times that when you say
EAX, we just mean the current value of
EAX and we're going to do something to
it and then we're going to throw it away
and then we're going to load something
new into EAX and we're going to just
keep doing this process over and over
again and those things are in separable
from each other. And so, one example of
something where
um the values of the registers are don't
depend on an earlier value of the
register is a loop because, you know,
we're going to read into EAX every time
around the loop and we're going to do
some work with it and then we're going
to store it into a value or whatever and
then we're going to start the loop again
and the bottom here. So, if we can break
that dependency,
um it means that we can run maybe two
iterations of the loop at the same time
or even more.
I'll show you what I mean. We've got
pictures coming for those of you that
are furrowing your brow.
So, the way that this works is we have a
table that tells us where each register
currently is. So, which of the physical
registers and again, this is my made up
syntax P whatever, um currently contain
the most contemporary value of RAX. So,
RAX is P39 and whatever. And then there
is a free list of registers. These are
registers that are currently spare chip
real estate going spare. Fantabulous.
For every time we read from a register,
we're going to use its current value in
the RAT.
Every time we write to a register and
completely replace it, it might as well
be a new register. So, we're going to
pick a new one off the free list,
use that instead and then update the
table to say this is where the the RAX
register is now.
So, this first instruction we're reading
the RDI register and we're going to go
and fetch memory from it and then we're
writing to EAX. It really doesn't matter
what was in EAX before. So, P39, don't
care about you. So, what we're going to
do, we're going to rename this
rename this to be P45 and hopefully you
saw that that kind of
went that way. That's me popping off the
front of the free list. This is in
hardware, remember by the way, you know,
this is like pretty impressive. And then
P22. And then this mul here is EAX with
itself, right? I'm squaring EAX and I'm
putting the result in EAX. And I know
the op code doesn't have three operands
or it can do for some multiplies, but
you know, it's been rewritten into this
nice risky form by this point. Um so,
when we read the EAX's, we're going to
use P45 and then when we write, we're
going to use a new one which will be uh
P46 and this is indeed what happens. And
so on and so forth. We can go through
the rest of it here.
And now we've got this whole rewritten
set of op of micro operations that are
phrased purely in terms of physical
registers only. And we've sort of
encoded the dependency between
instruction values by if you follow the
P45 in here, it's used here and then
it's done with. So, you know, that has
that's helped us.
So, this is what that loop looks like or
rather loop iteration and a half. Um
So, I've got one and a half because it
fits on the slide.
If we didn't have a rename,
this is what it would look like. So, the
first iteration of the loop is from here
to about here
and you can see that the next iteration
of the loop can't even start because,
well, I can't read through RDI until
I've finished adding to RDI from the
previous iteration, right? Because it's
like I have to wait for it, right? And
it couldn't start we couldn't add four
to it to move it forward until we'd
finished reading the memory address of
RDI because presumably I still need the
RDI register or whatever. Again, this is
I had to hack the code so badly to make
it do this and I then went through it
and sort of manually fixed it up, but
you get the idea.
If we were to sort of show you the
zoomed out view, it looks like this and
if you've seen these kind of diagrams,
you can squint and you just look at the
R's really and you kind of look down
there and this is I mean, mostly
throughput rather than latency, but it's
10 cycles an iteration. Doesn't seem
totally unreasonable. I mean, obviously
you'd use SIMD if you were actually
trying to do this for real, right? And
you get more per iteration, but 10
cycles an iteration.
If we rename it on the other hand, it
looks like this.
So, on the first
first cycle, we've already queued five
of our instructions
and we've issued four of them.
They the first and the fourth one can
already complete on cycle six because
this add can be running concurrently
with the load as they don't depend on
each other anymore and so on and so
forth. And you can see every time
there's an E, there's usually a D
underneath it because the the E means
it's finished executing and the results
become ready and immediately can be used
in the
uh
the the the instruction that depends
upon it. And this is evidence for the
broadcasting theory of this where it has
to kind of completes just goes
anyone who cares, P45 is now 27 and I
oh, cool, I got it and then he doesn't
have to wait another cycle.
Okay, I think we've got
everything. So, it looks pretty cool.
But if we zoom out, it's like
one and a half cycles an iteration. It
really makes a difference. It's super
cool.
All right, I've labored that enough.
Right, let's talk about my favorite
instructions. XOR EAX, EAX. You've all
seen it, right?
Yeah. Why the hell does it do that?
Anyone want to shout out?
No.
Nobody wants to shout out.
Sorry, Justin?
It sets it to zero, but why not just do
MOV EAX, zero? Come on.
Smaller instruction. It is. It's a
smaller instruction.
But wait, there's more. XOR EAX, so let
let's go through it first of all. So,
exclusive oring a number with itself
always leads to zero, right? Um
and because of the stupid syntax of
X86, this is EAX XOR equals EAX, right?
So, it ends up with zero, fine. Compiler
loves to do it, but the cool thing is
the CPU knows that you love to do this
as well and so it goes, oh, um
if you're setting a value to zero, I
don't need to do anything at all. All
I'm going to do is I'm going to arrange
to have a physical register that's
always the value zero
and I will just rename it. Okay, RAX is
now P00 and any kind of thing that reads
from it later on is just going to get
the value zero, right? We're done here.
Doesn't issue at all. So, although it's
written to the reorder buffer, it
doesn't go to any execution
unit. It doesn't take up any resources
at all. It's magic.
We can also do some oneing idioms. There
are some parallel oneing type things
that can generate an all one. So,
presumably there's some other magical
register that happens here.
Okay.
We can also do move elimination because
if you think about it, if I move RBX
into RAX, all I've done now is I've just
got two names for the same register.
So, we we just have to update the RAT
and say, well, you know, RAX is now P88
which is incidentally where RBX is at
the moment. There's no issue this is no
issue. This doesn't mean there's no
problem because there's a problem.
There's no issue. There's nothing
written. There's no actual work to do.
There's no actual ALU unit needs to be
done. But there is an issue because this
actually does introduce a complication.
It's surprising.
Um
there are limits. Um have I got a slide
on notes here? Uh ah, gone ahead by one.
So, there are limits, right? Because now
we're allowing a single physical
register to be aliased by more than one
architectural register which means that
suddenly we either have to do reference
counting to determine when we can free
that thing back up again or we need
another trick to determine when
everyone's finished with with that
particular physical register.
What it seems to use is it has four
slots for rename for for aliases
and once one of those slots has been
used by having two registers point at
the same thing,
it until all of those registers have
been overwritten, that P88 is now
locked. It can't be freed. And also that
slot can't be used by anything more. So,
you can do four moves in a row and
they're all free and then after that it
becomes really expensive to move between
registers until you overwrite both the
source and the destination that both
alias. That has gotten better and I
think they now use a bit master track
things in a much more clever way
because
on older Lake and onwards, they have
another trick and I I know that I said I
was just a scally, but this is just too
cool not to talk about.
Because, you know, adds and subtracts
are so straightforward, what if the
renamer goes, well, hang on, an add with
one, why don't I just rename it as RAX
is P88 and just remember it's got a one
added to it?
How cool. So, again, small increments
and adds don't take up any resources at
all. They just get written as sort of a
housekeeping issue inside the RAT.
We have to pay the price at some point
two reasons. One, the range is only
between minus 1024, so it's got 11 bits
of range. And then if it hits that
limit, it actually does issue the micro
operation that says, oh, fine, add the
thing and then we know where we are,
right? And then of course after that it
can be renamed from the new new value.
So, it's pretty cool.
Um there's also interestingly, if you
think about what this really means is
that
when
P88 becomes ready if it were depending
on it, anything that depends on P88 has
been given the
the the burden of having to now actually
do this damn add, right? And so, many of
the instructions, um that's fine, right?
You just it's like, okay, I'm reading
from P88 and there's an adder that kind
of runs in parallel and then by the time
the result gets to me,
it's already had that offset that needed
to be applied to it applied to it.
But the shift uh like logical shift, for
whatever reason, it takes a cycle to do
it. Every time it if you and and this is
how we discovered this is going on
because this is not in the literature
anywhere, right? Um
if you do um
if you like do MOV RAX, 10 and a shift,
you'll measure the shift takes one
cycle. If you do MOV um RAX,
zero, INC RAX and then you do the shift,
the shift now takes two cycles because
it pays for doing the add in a single
cycle beforehand. And we don't know why
it does that, but the the the the guess
that we have is that for things like
variable shifts where you're shifting by
the value of another register, because
the barrel shifter it needs a lot of
setup time and it's a lot of circuitry
to do that kind of 64-bit shift
arbitrarily, we figured that it probably
needs the results a lot earlier in the
cycle and so it hasn't got time to do
the add and then set up this thing. And
then rather than them just blanket the
um the shifts that have um variable
shifts, they just said all shifts. Or
it's a mistake. I mean, mistakes have
been made before as we've seen. So, this
is super cool. It's really interesting.
There's a whole blog post which I think
I've got at the end that that's
fascinating to dig into this. Okay.
We are 50 odd minutes in to the
presentation. I don't think I've lost
too many people. Most people's eyes are
still awake or open or they're awake or
both.
And we This is the summary. This is
where we are. But this is the meat of
the talk, just getting to this past
stage.
So, we've got a in a predicted program
order which gives us a sequence of
instructions. Those instruct or
instruction pointers which are then
fetched. They're decoded into
micro-operations. Those micro-operations
are renamed and then the reorder buffer
is written to in program order and then
these sort of micro-operations that are
pending execution get written into the
scheduler.
Right. Okay. Back end looks really
simple in comparison, but it does hide,
you know, kind of the thing we care
about, you know, actually doing the
work, right? Everything is just sort of
preamble.
So,
I've already said re-reservation
station. The scheduler and the
reservation station are two names that
Intel use interchangeably or certainly
Agner Fog does. And so that's where I'm
getting a lot of my information from
there. The execution and then the write
back. So, it sort of looks something
like this. We've got Now it's We've gone
from this nice pipeline to a big soup of
things that can be done at some point.
And so we've got this the the two
reservations to two schedulers, whatever
we call them, reservation stations that
have their 13 line entries that are just
sat there waiting for either all of
their operands to be ready
Sorry, not either. Waiting for their
operands to be ready and for an
execution unit that they've been tagged
to go to to become free. So, that's what
they're sitting there in this of these
queues.
But again, the queues are not really any
order. It's just whatever's ready. We've
got the reorder buffer and we the write
back for the reorder buffer is just to
say this instruction is now done. It was
completed. It doesn't have to be any
other values. Now, way back when in sort
of like the
Oh, crap. What was the one Sandy Bridge?
I'm forgetting now. They have such
stupid names. I really wish they would
come up with a good name exists. Anyway,
earlier earlier on, the reorder buffer
actually contained the physical
registers. Effectively, it just used the
reorder buffer as the physical register
store. And so the results of everything
were written back into the ROB, but
that's no longer the case. They are
still They live down here because we
added, you know, vector operations. And
if we had, you know, 512-bit wide slots
up there, it's a lot of waste for a lot
of, you know, they're still writing
AVX-512 all the time, which maybe you
are.
I know you can't tell me. Um
Maybe you can.
Um no. So, we've got reservation station
here. Um yes, we've got various ports
attached to these reservation stations.
And sort of broadly, the big picture
thing is every clock cycle, the the
scheduler says which of these
micro-operations is ready to run and
issues them to one of these ports that
has many actual logical units. You'd
think that this is just like an address
this you know, multiplier or whatever,
but they each have different usages. And
then those are pipelined themselves, so
they have their own pipeline, but
they're fixed length and they come out.
And when the result comes out, five
cycles later, three cycles later,
whatever, it comes back into this right
back bus and it sort of says, yes, P47
is now 127. Maybe it's written to the
physical register file. Well, it's
definitely written to the physical
register file. Maybe it's written to and
snooped on by some of the other entries
that are waiting for that result. And
they become ready to run. And then the
whole process just keeps going until
there's Well, just keeps going. There's
no It never stops, right?
Fabulous. Okay. So, looking at the ports
that we have, this again is Skylake
We've got a whole bunch more on the more
up-to-date Granite Rapids type things.
But by and large, you can sort of see
where all of the engineering effort went
down on this poor thing that gets all
this work here. So, there are three
units that can do integer and vector
vector operations on like simple
integers. Um there's there's two that
can do the shift, one that does the
permute, some string operations and
whatever. The number here is the
latency, incidentally. Um
so, um if you if you're doing you're
doing it wrong if you're using x86, for
what it's worth. And so the the
execution ports over here are doing all
um arithmetic type stuff except for the
kind of like here's one of these kids
that doesn't look the same as the
others, which is the store unit, which
is weird that the store unit doesn't
live in the load store unit, but
whatever.
Um
Over on this world,
a bunch of load ports that can do works
and they can also generate the address
of the store. And then one sort of
really um you know, kid that can only do
simple addresses and therefore, you
know, um I don't know what happened
here. Maybe they were like we
copy-pasted it twice and then they
didn't have enough room for it. They
edited a bit and were like, well, we
can't do the complicated addressing
here. We'll just have to have that kid
do that.
Cool. Right. I forgot where I was going
with this. Never mind. I think you get
the idea. There's a lot of things that
go to different ports. Um you'll um
Yes. And so yeah, typically it picks the
highest port of the available ports if
there's a tie because the higher ports
can do fewer things. And so if it can do
a vector shift in this one, it's kind of
freeing up ports zero and one to do more
of the other weird thing that might be
coming down the line.
All right. So, the address generation
and store load unit generates addresses.
Surprise.
And it does the loads. Hey, who thought?
Um What does that really mean?
Um well, we're going to have to
introduce something called the MOB, the
memory order buffer. This is probably
the most complicated part and we only
have like four minutes to do this, so
there's going to be necessarily some
simplifications here. Some of the
simplifications is in my understanding.
Some of the simplification is that no
one has come up with a way of measuring
exactly how this works yet. And some of
it is I don't know user error on my
part. I don't know.
Um so, there are three kind of parts to
this. There's a load buffer and a store
buffer.
And there are some predictors which are
absolutely bonkers that we talked about
earlier and I don't think I have time to
go into depth that we went into at the
table, but
this prediction is all over the place.
So, the store buffer
holds all of the stores that have not
yet gone out to the real memory.
And now remember, everything we're doing
is speculative speculative at this
point. Until the instruction retires, we
haven't got cast iron guarantee that
something upstream of it that happened
in program order before it hasn't gone,
oh, I just divided by zero or I
mispredicted a branch or anything like
that. So, until it gets to that
retirement unit, we can't let the store
go out to to real memory, right?
So, we have to hold it in this sort of
holding pattern. But of course, if I
store to memory
and then the next instruction reads from
memory, I might reasonably expect to see
the number I just stored in memory,
right? That would seem quite bad if it
didn't. So, I have to do something about
this. So, the store buffer is has many
many hats. One of them wants to just to
hold the stores until they go out to
memory. The other one is to kind of
handle the loads that have come after it
that might need to read from the things
that haven't yet committed.
So, it's broad broadly broken into these
two parts where we have the address
calculation and the data calculation
separately from each other. And this is
why this data unit lives in the ALU
because where do the where do the values
that are going to be stored come from?
Probably the ALU.
And the address is generated by the the
address gen. What we're doing here is
that by separating them, most of the
time, maybe not all the time.
Some of the time. Let's just go with
some of the time. Some of the time, you
know what address you're going to be
storing to earlier than the data that's
going to be stored to it. Like, you
know, you square root something 20 times
in a row. So, you got this huge long
dependency chain of square roots and
then you store it to address 20. Right?
I know that it's going to store to
address 20 pretty early on. I'm going to
have to wait through 500 cycles before
those square roots have all completed.
Why do I care about the address? Well,
if I've got a load coming on and it's
not to address 20, I can do that load.
So, I I need the address more than I
care about the data for the purposes of
letting other instructions that are
later in the flow get their results.
So, we have the address, we have the
data, we have how wide that is, whether
it's completed or not, and whether or
not it caused a fault.
Obviously, again, if we cause a fault,
but we it was on a path that is not got
to because we're going to divide by zero
before we get to the fault or, you know,
Spectre meltdown notwithstanding, you
know,
then we don't want that to actually take
effect. And so when it comes to
retirement, we'll we'll check whether it
was a fault or not.
Uh so, stores, we have to wait for those
two, address calculation and the data
operations. And then we sit in that
buffer serving the incoming reads. And
then eventually, we actually commit. And
that happens way much later after we
retire this once it's retired.
Uh the load buffer on the other hand
stores the loads that are happening and
some status about the prediction stuff
that I alluded to, but I'm not going to
go into. But this is useful tracking
some guesses. It makes some intelligent
guesses about whether or not a load may
never alias, in which case it can issue
it really really early. The problem with
that is if it gets it wrong, it's
incredibly expensive. It has to do a
whole bunch of like uh
state clearing to kind of undo the fact
that it let a load happen that was
actually dependent on a store before it,
but it didn't run. There's not not like
an undo mechanism for that. So, it just
throws everything away.
Um so, we have, you know, some kind of
reference to where the ROB is, how wide
it is, and what address it's going to uh
that it's been served from. And again,
um this is also
the the the the order in here and this
the store color here is a reference.
It's called this in the literature.
There's a there's a
um
a pattern that talks about store color.
They don't go into any details of what
that really means. If you look at the
RISC-V implementation of this, it uses a
complicated bit mask, but effectively,
this is some way of it saying which
stores could potentially have affected
this load. As in, where is it in the
sequence of stores so that I've got some
way of tying the things together and
knowing that like once all previous
stores have been accounted for, I can do
this load.
All right.
So, loading is really really really
complicated, which is one of the other
reasons why it's slow. Not just, you
know, we talk about L1 cache. It's like,
hey, it's three or four cycles to get to
L1 cache. It's like, it's going to do
all this as well, right? We first of we
do some prediction about the ambiguity.
Again, out of scope, unfortunately. We
have to wait for the address to be
calculated. Hopefully, that's quick. And
then we have to check the store buffer.
Now, if we get a hit in the store buffer
and there are no intervening stores
between the hit that we made and
anything that hasn't yet been resolved,
then we know that no store earlier than
this load can possibly affect the value
other than the one we found. And we can
go, "Hooray! We don't even have to go to
L1. This is like L0 cache. Here you go.
Here's your number."
If that's not true, if we miss, as in we
don't find anything in there, but there
are also no stores that haven't been
resolved earlier than us, we know like,
"Hey,
there are no stores that are in the
queue that have not yet been flushed out
to memory, so we can just issue the load
now." And then it will actually finally
go to the L1 and start the whole process
of reading from memory. And obviously
the load finishes and eventually
completes and comes back and then we
kind of
send it off to the program. It's a
miracle that any of this stuff works,
right?
And if not, if it was still in sort of
ambiguous state where there are
unresolved stores, we just have to wait.
We have to keep going and sit in this
queue until all of those stores have
been resolved, which is why we try and
predict if it's going to happen. And
sometimes that's worth it.
Okay, here there's some patent number
here, which I'm sure you're not allowed
to click on because of all the legal
things, but let's not go there. All
right. Uh the other thing that the
memory order buffer is involved in is
all of those horrible locked
instructions that you want to do.
Fences, so you know, like store fences
and load fences are like operations that
will cause those things to drain out
before any further instructions that can
issue loads can happen and that kind of
stuff. And it's sort of vaguely alluded
I'm going to put just the worst total
sort of here, but my my confidence in
this has been irredeemably shaken by our
conversations earlier. Where's Andrew?
He was He was here earlier, I'm sure.
Yeah, yeah, there he is.
So, there's definitely some things that
go on with this, but that happens on
later on. Um
So, finally we get to talk about
execution. We are We are now exactly at
an hour since I started talking to you
all and we're going to talk about
execution, which is luckily the most
boring stage because it just it does
what the old CPUs used to do, right? You
know, it's pipelined, you know, there
are machine traps. Interesting, this is
where floating point assists happen. If
whoever is has ever hit the hideous
performance cliff of denormals, there
are some nods in here. To the best of my
understanding, what happens here is that
if you So, the floating point unit can't
handle numbers that are like not 1. * 10
to the minus whatever or 2 to the minus
whatever. Um so, for very very very
small num- numbers that are below float
min, whatever the thing is, um the there
has to be special casing for it. So, the
hardware can't do it, but it can't
determine that ahead of time. So, by the
time it gets to this point the the
multiplier of the adder and divider
goes, "Oh, crap. Uh
Uh
right. Uh what do we do? We've We've got
like a a number I can't deal with." It
just has to essentially flush the
pipeline. And then it goes back to the
microcode sequence uh and says, "Can you
just generate me the code that can
handle this, please?" You're like,
"What?" You know, dynamically like
undoing as is a deoptimization kind of
thing, like a jit deopt. Um yeah, it's
crazy. Anyway, and the execution ports,
we hope that they're balanced. Like in
terms of the latencies, if I go back to
the slide before, it used to be the case
you could sort of see, "Oh,
Oh, all right. I won't do it now. But
like the the they try to like make it so
that there aren't different latency
numbers of instructions because one of
the other things that happens is if two
instructions on an execution port
complete in the same cycle, like you've
got a three-cycle guy and a five-cycle
instruction that was issued two cycles
earlier, they both want to complete in
that last cycle and that
that would delay one of them. So, they
try to avoid that by like coming up with
sensible everything's a multiple of two
over here and then we do this type of
thing or whatever. There's There's some
tricks to it.
Um gosh, where were we?
So, that's what I mean by that. Uh
and then yeah, we we talked about this.
The write-back stage is the results are
broadcast, they're written to the the
permanent register file
physical register file, not the
permanent register file, that's
different. And it's marked complete in
the reorder buffer. All right.
Retirement. Retirement is the easy bit.
Um
all we're doing all the retirement
system is I mean, yeah, we're all We're
all trying to retire. I know I know,
earlier perhaps than than not, but but
finally everything is done. So,
that reorder buffer is essentially that
ledger again of all instructions that
flow through the system. The retirement
system is trying to pick up as many
um completed instructions as it possibly
can and say, "Okay, these are now done."
And they can be freed back off. And what
That's the other thing, it does do the
freeing. So, this is where the registers
that were renamed are now freed back to
the system as they've been all the way
through the system. But of course, the
op- opcodes that we've just seen, it's
not that the it's not that the register
that was just got written to that we're
freeing, it's whatever it used to be
when it was renamed right back at the
beginning of the pipeline. So, we know
that when we complete the register that
replaces EAX completely and it used to
be PA88 and it's now P50, at the point
that it retires PA88 is now free. So,
that's when it gets chained back onto
the list. And that's also why
that is simple provided you have no
aliasing and no one else has also got
PA88 at that point. Um
so, this is where exceptions actually
get handled. We talked about this as
just a flag and then that's when the
whole thing goes horribly wrong.
Hopefully you're not doing too many
exceptions in your code. And not not
exceptions like C++ exceptions, I mean
exceptions like machine checks and um
you know, divide by zero and and um
memory stuff.
The stores are also marked as senior in
that memory order buffer because they
they're going to continue to live in
there until they actually get flushed
out to the real memory. And the retire
system can do four micro-ops a cycle,
which is very rarely a limitation, but
if you you can you can sort of prove it
with very very pathological code. Um
yes, and then late The last stage is
It's not really a stage at this point.
It's just that the the um the store
buffer is kind of retiring stores in
order as well. As they become senior,
that means they can go out. That means
the instruction that caused them to
become ready um
uh has completed, so they they're okay
to be committed. And then some magic
happens, something something total store
order, some kind of liaison with the
other the chips uh on the on the die and
all the other um
subsystems. And I This is where I can
tell as far as I can tell this is where
the RFO, the read for ownership, that
actually is the kind of kind when we
talk about pa- cache ping-ponging and
false sharing, this seems to be when it
happens. I was very vague on this,
honestly. I was trying to work out where
it could possibly happen. I should
probably talk to you all and see if you
can have opinions on that afterwards,
but it seemed Okay, right. Well, that's
it. It's pretty straightforward, right?
And to think that I was going to talk to
you about branch predictors as well. Uh
but um you know,
I uh where's the next thing? There it
is. Yes, a conclusion. There's not
really a conclusion to this. The whole
talk is the conclusion. It's like this
thing is an amazing edifice that's been
built, right? It's amazingly
complicated. Uh the kind of advice and I
I I feel like I'm you know, teaching
your grandmother to suck eggs here. This
is like you all know this, you know. Do
things simply and straightforwardly.
Don't do divides. Again.
Integer divides, that is. Floating point
divides fine.
I don't care about those. Uh small align
loops are good. Um
the the let the renamer do its work.
Again, I wrote this before I had the
conversation with some of your experts
and um
the the call for more registers was
really interesting to me because I
hadn't really thought about the
implications, but my small loops seem to
work okay. So, I'll stick with those.
Um but yeah, so the renamer is really
clever at doing its work. You shouldn't
need to worry about having more
registers.
With an hour massive footnote, speak to
these people.
Um yeah, I'm sure you all have
questions. Um I've got a whole bunch of
references here that you can go and look
at. I will make sure that these slides
are available to you all so you can go
and look through them all. Um thank you
very much indeed.
[Applause]
All right, I got the queue.
Is there anyone brave enough? I have I
have swag as well. You can come and get
stickers.
Before you go, you can come and grab a
sticker or I have one special or two two
coasters, which are not very exciting
cuz they're made of cardboard, but
I'm trying to bribe you to talk to me.
Somebody speak. Come on.
Oh, there is a question. Hello. All
right, I'm going to try not to hit
anyone, but I'm sorry. I don't think I
signed anything
to say I wasn't causing physical damage.
Uh are are the physical registers like
equally as wide?
Good question. Um no. So, the physical
register file is broken into different
pieces. I thought I had the numbers up
on one of the slides. Maybe I did, but I
didn't talk about it. Um there are
different number of registers for
different types of Sorry, different
number of physical registers for
different types. There are like several
hundred flags registers because they're
small and pretty much every instruction
affects the flags, but almost every
other instruction doesn't give a
about what those flags were. So, you
want to try and rename them away and
make sure there's no false dependencies.
For the AVX things instruc- registers,
there seems to be a batch of like
full-width
um 512-bit physical registers. And the
renamer seems to want to use those only
when it knows that it needs them.
Otherwise it it tries to use 256-bit.
Again, it's trying to save some kind of
real estate. Again, I I'm waving my
hands a bit here cuz I haven't had full
experience personally of this, but I
from re- reading in the literature,
there is some kind of cleverness about
the allocation of those. And obviously
then the 64-bit general purpose
registers are there's just some couple
of hundreds of them. And I'm going to
put They're at least 64 bits wide. They
are at least 64 Yes, and they're they're
made for each type of register. So,
they're at least 64 bits wide. Yeah, um
another thing to note I I was very
cavalier about saying RAX and then then
showing things that had EAX on them and
all that kind of stuff. Now, we all know
that they are the quote same register.
It used to be the case again Sandy
Bridge era that if you wrote to say AX,
then um the register allocator gave you
a new AX RAX like EAX effectively at
that point. And then it also wrote out
an opcode that was like and or it with
the remaining part of the old version of
that register, right? To kind of combine
them. That seems to be not the case
anymore. It just seems to just emit them
and magic happens and and and you if you
write to the bottom 16 bits, then uh you
don't have to do any extra work. But
yeah, so but they're all 64 bits wide is
my understanding. Yeah. Good question.
Okay, one over there. Do you want to try
and pass it over rather than
Excellent. Uh do you have much of a
sense of how much variety there is in
the design between like these Intel CPUs
and AMD or even like other
high-performance CPUs? Uh not really,
actually. No, my my my my sort of
childhood experience was all ARM, but
then that was very, very old and and not
very sophisticated. Um and then I've
only really been concentrating on the
Intel CPUs. That Having been said, you
know, the things that I know are
different in AMD are the branch
predictor. That's something I've done my
own research on to, and that is very
That's got a very different ethos. It's
sort of Um but I don't know about this
these kinds of aspects of it. I Maybe
someone else in here will do, but
Sorry for the non-answer.
And there's a question there.
Um I I've heard like two perspectives on
whether ISA matters. Like is ARM faster
because of, you know, all the non-ISA
things, or is it faster because of ISA?
So what is your take?
So I think, again, in those halcyon days
when ARM was actually a RISC processor
and was, you know, I could disassemble
it by just by looking at the instruction
because they were that straightforward,
I think it probably had an edge against
the the contemporary x86 era
um thoughts. But I think that ship has
sailed, you know, with all of the new
whiz-bang features that the ARM can do
now. I think they have just as
complicated a set of decode steps and
prediction and and pipelines and out of
order and all that kind of stuff. So I
don't know that it makes that much
difference. It's more of an
implementation detail of the front end
as to how the actual adds and subtracts
get their way into the ALU than that is
um
uh
you know,
I guess the one one argument could be
that the x86 ISA is sort of poor man's
compression, so you get a little bit
more I-cache usage, maybe. But, you
know, we've all seen 15 site of 15-byte
instructions as well. You're like, "I
don't know if that's better, you know."
So yeah. No, again, another non-answer
for you there, I'm afraid.
Question at the front, I think. If you
want to
carefully. There we are. Lovely.
Um like how did anyone figure any of
this out? Like what kind of crazy
experiments are people running to figure
all this out?
>> yeah, huge shout-out to the OG for all
this is Agner Fog, who is a Danish a
retired now, as I found out last week, a
retired Danish anthropologist, which is
exactly the kind of person you'd
imagine.
He seems to be more of a social
anthropologist than a technology-focused
anthropologist, or was. And so this sort
of
Why?
I'm doing something. So he he did a
whole bunch of experiments to reverse
engineer things. Now, so the short
answer for for for that is there are
performance counters. Those performance
counters have revealing names, even if
Intel don't really want you to know
what's going on. And you can use them
and infer from their usage. So like the
my own research back on earlier was
about um answering the question did the
You know that the the XKCD with someone
is wrong on the internet?
And you're like,
"I've got to go." It was one of those.
Someone made some sweeping statement
about like backwards branches were
always predicted taken.
And I'm like, "Really?
Always? Hm?
But what if you don't take it?
You know, what if it's a conditional
branch that's backwards?
Um
Anyway, the the long and the short of it
is yes, it is in on some unconditional
ones are different from conditional
ones, whatever. But like the the the the
measurements were due to do two things
that were in the Intel documentation
about early resteers. And they don't
tell you what this is. It's just like,
"Oh yeah, the number of times the
pipeline was was resteered early." And
you're like,
"Okay." And then late resteer and then
some other thing. And if basically
my
inference, which was backed up by the
evidence I got and the conclusions I
drew, was
like I said in the beginning, you don't
even know if there's a branch in a
16-byte block of memory, right? So the
fetcher is just going predict Sorry,
yeah, the BPU and the fetcher are just
going to go 16 bytes, 16 bytes, 16
bytes, 16 bytes. But as soon as a branch
is detected really early, like in that
decode decode stage, it can send a
message to say, "Oh, well, whatever
you're doing is probably wrong, because
if you didn't tell me that I had to
branch at this point,
you should branch." And so that was an
early resteer. So it's like only three
cycles of latency, and then suddenly
you're already getting on the right.
And so by playing around with that, plus
by branching forwards and backwards and
then timing it and then seeing how far
apart instructions were, that's what
those color pictures were, you can kind
of infer some of the patterns of what
what's going on. And then for things
like the much more complicated stuff
like the micro-operations and stuff,
there are counters of how many micro-ops
um have been executed by each stage of
the pipeline. So you can run experiments
where you're just kind of adding over
and over and over again. You say like,
"Oh yeah, the counts are going up from
ports 0, 1, and 7. So those are the
three that can do this operation." And
so on and so forth.
Um and then you know, you build huge
dependency chains and then you try and
do some things behind the back of those
dependency chains and see which other
counters go up. And you're like, "Oh,
these things are weird that we hit the
renamer. It wasn't able to rename
anymore because like well, it was wait
Things like that." So there's a whole
bunch of experiments and um
Travis Downs has probably got the best
set of um work on this. So he's This is
his blog, but he also uh writes
something called uarch-bench.
Am I getting that right? Which is um
kind of like a whole suite of
micro-architectural benchmarks. Agner
Fog has his own stuff as well. I've got
my own branch of that, which is what I
use for the BTP stuff, which I is now
I've made it recompile again. It's It
was It was broken as hell. Um so yeah,
there's And then Andreas Abel and his um
I can't think of the the other person on
this paper, but as a I think it was his
master's thesis, they spent a whole
bunch of time trying to work out the
algorithms behind the renamer and the
the uh which ports get allocated at what
time and how long they are. And they
found a whole bunch of things that like
no one else had ever noticed before,
which was just bonkers. And then I I
love the fact that we can experiment
with something which like I'm carrying
around with me all the time. And you're
like, "I wonder how it works." And
you're like, "You can go and find out."
But yes, so the short answer is all
those weird counters and then very
careful timings. And the the sadness
about this is, and I'm sure we again, we
talked about this earlier, is that most
of these things only work if you have
actually got a physical machine in front
of you, which obviously I do in the case
of a laptop and I do in my desktop at
home.
You know, I tried to get a
a Granite Rapids machine, and I, you
know, it's expensive enough to hire
them. And then I get to the my Amazon uh
account. And I've got it running and I'm
like, "sudo this." And it's like, "Oh,
there's only three hardware counters on
this." And I'm sure there's more than
three hardware count- Oh, it's virtual,
isn't it?
So I couldn't do the measurements I
wanted to on those. Um
And it's the same with magic trace,
right? You need a real actual
honest-to-goodness computer to run it on
in order to actually get an answer.
Any other questions?
Thank you, by the way.
All right, you want the one next to you,
and then we've got one behind you. Um do
you have a favorite x86 instruction? Do
I have Oh, no.
Not re- I'm very simple, actually. I
quite like
I quite like um
There's one of the parallel comparison
things that I always forget, but I when
I see it, it makes me chuckle. And I
can't think which one it is. It's like
what like PCLMEQ
something something. No, I Yeah, good
question. I just want the kind of thing
I should have a good answer for, but I
do not know.
We'll accept least favorite, too. Uh
least favorite?
Ah.
Least favorite?
I mean,
No, I I wish I had a pithy and amusing
answer for you, but you're putting me on
the spot.
What was the They were took one away for
the um
They took one instruction away that used
to be used for binary coded decimal, and
it was They didn't bother porting it to
the the the 64-bit. And I'm like,
"Come on, you have so much legacy crap,
and you didn't bring this instruction
over." And that's got a funny name. I
can't remember what it is now, but
anyway.
Yes, sir. Presumably, we can use this to
make our code fast. And Intel wants
their CPUs to look very fast. So why is
this all so hidden and impossible to
describe, and why don't they just tell
us more? I don't know. So you can I
mean,
again, it may be possible that within
this building there are people have
access to information that I do not have
access to, but I am certainly aware of
it my time at at Google that if you have
a certain volume of uh
of uh um
uh chips that you buy from Intel, then
there's a sort of sliding scale of how
many how friendly they'll be with you,
going from like we can send somebody to
come and help you debug your problems
through to we can fabricate your own
specification of chip, and here's the
designs and they had a the pink books, I
think, and the yellow books. They were
like different names for different
levels of classified information. And
suddenly,
when I had some very off-the-record
conversations with some some
contemporaries around the Spectre and
Meltdown times, they were like, "Well,
yeah, the pink thing, it talks about
the" And I'm like, "What are you talk-
Whoa, what?" And they're like, "Have you
not got those?" I'm like,
"No." And they're like, "Oh, we
shouldn't have said anything." And I'm
like, "Oh my god, even knowing that they
exist is a
So
I think some people do have access to
this information. But to answer your
actual question, I think they
they don't want to promise things about
how it works, because, you know, what is
it? Ah, Hyrum's Law. Anything that can
be relied upon will ultimately end up
being relied upon. Of course, you know,
that's why we have instructions from the
1970s, although not my my my friend the
binary coded decimal adjustment.
Um so they don't want to be painting
themselves into a corner, and presumably
as well as an intellectual property
aspect to this. You know, even though it
gets reverse engineered. So like um
The branch predictor in particular, I
think, is one thing, cuz I do know that
AMD is very different from the the x86
one Sorry, the Intel one.
And um yeah, the the folks who reverse
engineered the the Skylake branch
predictor,
um they found a really interesting case
where and again, we don't I have
I was going to do some more slides that
I could afflict you with, but
unfortunately, I didn't get around to
them. But effectively,
the various smooshing and hashing and
things that it does to kind of come up
with a this is a fingerprint for this
particular branch and the sequence of
operations that led to it, such that I
can have a a table that says, "Hey, the
last time we were in this state at this
branch, we took the branch." You know,
that kind of feel. That's what it's
going on in a branch predictor, right?
Um they um
the sm- They discovered, these
researchers, that the bit five of the of
the branch address was essentially a
direct map. So if it was clear, there
was one half of the entire branch
prediction system that you were using.
And if it was set, there was the other
half of the entire product you know the
effectively the hash didn't mix bit
five. And they used it to uh generate a
sandbox
sort of meltdown Spectre style where if
you're a JIT compiler, you could
contrive the code that you JIT compiled
to only allow branches to happen when
bit five was set.
Right? In your in the code that you
generated. And then you make sure that
your supervisor and all the checks about
like are you in bounds? Are you not in
bounds? Whatever has bit you know people
laughing bit five clear. And now you
effectively have two branch prediction
domains. And now you're not subject to
Spectre meltdown. How cool is that? And
I'm like yeah, if they'd have told us
that, we'd have used it. But then of
course now they'd be like oh we
have to keep it this way. We probably
didn't even know ourselves that bit five
leaking out like that. So, I think it's
a bit of all you know what what is the
Hanlon's razor? Never ascribe Yeah no no
I don't think Hanlon's Hanlon's razor
applies here which is what is the never
ascribe to malice that which is
explained by incompetence. But no, cuz I
think a very very common to people I
think some very careful decisions have
to be made about this kind of stuff. I
mean we are obviously in a very
sensitive intellectual property
environment ourselves. And so, you know,
try trying to tow the line between the
things that we do think is useful
and the things that most people don't
need to know but could be a competitive
advantage would be my biggest guess
there.
Plus just documenting it would be a
pain.
Any more questions?
Okay, I'm being waved at from the back
as in times like we're done on the time.
So, once again, thank you all for
inviting me out here. I've had a
wonderful time and
yeah.